docs: add documentation about using Metrics API/SDK (#3349)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js: doc/metrics.md

# Metrics

This quick start is for end users of OpenTelemetry who wish to manually measure their applications. If you are a library author, please see the [Library Authors Guide](library-author.md). If you wish to automatically instrument your application, see the automatic instrumentation documentation for the SDK you wish to use.

For a high-level overview of OpenTelemetry metrics in general and definitions of some common terms, you can refer to the [OpenTelemetry Specification Overview][spec-overview]

_Metrics API Specification: <https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.14.0/specification/metrics/api.md>_

_Metrics API Reference: <https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-js-api/classes/metricseapi.html>_

> - [Acquiring a Meter](#acquiring-a-meter)

Reviewer: I think we should add a "quick start" at the top which shows the minimum to set up the API and SDK and export to something (prom or console i guess). Right now I miss a full e2e example.

Reviewer 2: Yep, having a "right way" to set up the SDK would be ideal. I can take that + what's here and more or less plant it in the website.

Re: a full e2e quick start ... perhaps, if there's a way to include that here and base it off of the [python quickstart](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/python/getting-started/) that could be cool. I plan on eventually reworking the Node quickstart in the docs to follow this pattern. So long as I know the best way to initialize the SDK/API for metrics, I can just take that on though.

Author: I will work on a getting started based on the Python one as first chapter of the file.

Author: I have added something @cartermp @dyladan

_Metrics API Specification: <https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.14.0/specification/metrics/api.md>_

_Metrics API Reference: <https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-js-api/classes/metricseapi.html>_

- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Acquiring a Meter](#acquiring-a-meter)
- [Create a metric instrument](#create-a-metric-instrument)
- [Describing a instrument measurement](#describing-a-instrument-measurement)
  - [Metric Attributes](#metric-attributes)
  - [Semantic Conventions](#semantic-conventions)
- [Configuring metric views](#configuring-metric-views)
  - [Configuring explicit bucket sizes for the Histogram instrument](#configuring-explicit-bucket-sizes-for-the-histogram-instrument)
  - [Dropping instrument from being exported](#dropping-instrument-from-being-exported)
  - [Customising the metric attributes of instrument](#customising-the-metric-attributes-of-instrument)
- [Exporting measurements](#exporting-measurements)
  - [Exporting measurements to Prometheus](#exporting-measurements-to-prometheus)
  - [Exporting measurements to Opentelemetry Protocol](#exporting-measurements-to-opentelemetry-protocol)

## Getting Started

> In thie page, you'll leaarn how to setup Opentelemetry and metrics from an HTTP server with Fastify. If you're not using Fastify, that's fine -- this guide will also work with Express, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this page, you'll learn how to setup OpenTelemetry JS to export metrics from an HTTP server with Fastify. If you're not using Fastify, the concepts in this guide will still apply.
```

### Installation
To begin, set up an environment in a new directory:

```bash
mkdir otel-getting-started
cd otel-getting-started
npm init -y
```

Now install Fastify and OpenTelemetry:

```bash
npm install fastify @opentelemetry/sdk-node @opentelemetry/exporter-prometheus @opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node
```

> The `@opentelemetry/sdk-node` and `@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node` will install allt he

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@opentelemetry/sdk-node` and `@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node` will install all the
```

necessary packages to start with Opentelemetry including instrumentation for a wide variety of popular
packages, such as `http`, `fetch` etc. The package `@opentelemetry/exporter-prometheus` is installed

> to export our measured metrics in the Prometheus format as popular approach to expose metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to export our collected metrics to Prometheus.
```

metrics.

A Metric View is a class that can be instantiated via:

````typescript
const view = new View({
  name: 'metric-view', // optionally, give the view a unique name
  // select instruments with a specific name
  instrumentName: 'http.server.duration',
});
````

In the above example a View is created which select instruments with the name `http.server.duration` other options to select instruments are:

- By Instrument Type: use `instrumentType` to select instruments of the given type
- By Meter: use `meterName` to select meters with the given name
- By Meter Version: use `meterVersion` to select meters with the given version
- By Meter Schema URL: use `meterSchemaUrl` to select meters with given schema url

The `instrumentName` has support for wildcards, so you can select all instruments
using `*` or select all instruments starting with 'http.' by using `http.*`.

_Note_: The Views can only be defined when the `MeterProvider` instance gets
instantiated. A proposal is submitted to ease the ability to define Metrics Views:
<https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/issues/209>

### Configuring explicit bucket sizes for the Histogram instrument

> The Histogram instruments has default set of bucket sizes defined which not might
> not all suit your needs. The bucket sizes can be overridden by configuring a different

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Histogram instrument has a predefined default set of bucket sizes which might not
suit all your needs. The bucket sizes can be overridden by configuring a different
```

  instrumentType: InstrumentType.HISTOGRAM,
});

// Note, the instrumentName is the same as the name that has been passed for
// the Meter#createHistogram function

// Create an instance of the metric provider
const meterProvider = new MeterProvider({
  views: [
    histogramView
  ]
});

// Create histogram metric
const httpServerDuration = meter.createHistogram("http.server.duration", {
  description: 'A http server duration',
  unit: 'milliseconds',
  valueType: ValueType.INT
});

// Record measurement for histogram
httpServerDuration.record(50, {
  [SemanticAttributes.HTTP_METHOD]: 'POST',
  [SemanticAttributes.HTTP_STATUS_CODE]: '200',
  [SemanticAttributes.HTTP_SCHEME]: 'https',
});
```

### Dropping instrument from being exported

In some circumstances you don't want specific metrics to be exported by Opentelemetry,
for example, you might be using custom instrumentation or third-party packages that
define their own metrics you are not interested in.

In such cases you can define a customer view which drop the instruments you are
not interesting in, for example, you can drop instruments of a specific meter or
instruments with a specific name:

> 
> The following view drops all instruments that are associated with a meter with
> the name `pubsub`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

The following view drops all instruments that are associated with a meter named `pubsub`:
```

```typescript
const dropView = new View({
  aggregation: new DropAggregation(),
  meterName: 'pubsub',
});
```

Alternatively, you can also drop instruments with a specific instrument name,
for example, all instruments of which the name starts with `http`:

```typescript
const dropView = new View({
  aggregation: new DropAggregation(),

>   instrumentName: 'htpp*',

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  instrumentName: 'http*',
```

If you want to limit the Metric Attributes that get exported in measurements of
an instrument, you can create a Metric View which defines which attributes should
be exported. Attributes that are missing in the list will not be exported.

In the example below will drop all attributes except attribute `environment` for
all instruments.

```typescript
new View({
  // only export the attribute 'environment'
  attributeKeys: ['environment'],
  // apply the view to all instruments
  instrumentName: '*',
})
```

## Exporting measurements

After you have instrumented your application with metrics, you also need to make
sure that the metrics get collected by your metrics backend. The most common formats
that are used are Prometheus and OLTP.

The latter is the [Opentelemetry protocol format](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/protocol/otlp.md)
which is supported by the Opentelemetry Collector. The former is based on the [OpenMetrics
format](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md) can be consumed by Prometheus and Thanos or other OpenMetrics compatible
backends.

> _Note_: Both Opentelemetry Javascript and Opentelemetry Collector support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_Note_: Both OpenTelemetry JavaScript and OpenTelemetry Collector support
```

exporters for different formats, such as [Cloud Monitoring](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/opentelemetry-operations-js/tree/master/packages/opentelemetry-cloud-monitoring-exporter).

## Exporting measurements to Prometheus

> If you want to export your metrics to Prometheus you need to initialize Opentelemetry

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to export your metrics to Prometheus you need to initialize OpenTelemetry
```

to use the Prometheus exporter `PrometheusExporter` which is included in the
`@opentelemetry/exporter-prometheus`-package.

```typescript
const { PrometheusExporter } = require('@opentelemetry/exporter-prometheus');
const { MeterProvider }  = require('@opentelemetry/sdk-metrics');

// Add your port and startServer to the Prometheus options
const options = { port: 9464, startServer: true };
const exporter = new PrometheusExporter(options);

// Creates MeterProvider and installs the exporter as a MetricReader
const meterProvider = new MeterProvider();
meterProvider.addMetricReader(exporter);
const meter = meterProvider.getMeter('example-prometheus');

// Now, start recording data
const counter = meter.createCounter('metric_name', {
  description: 'Example of a counter'
});
counter.add(10, { pid: process.pid });
```

In the above example the instantiated `PrometheusExporter` is configured to expose
a new http server on port 9464. You can now access the metrics at the endpoint

> <http://localhost:9464/metrics>.  This is the url that can be scraped by Prometheus so it can consumed the metrics collected by Opentelemetry in your application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<http://localhost:9464/metrics>. This is the URL that can be scraped by Prometheus so it can consumed the metrics collected by OpenTelemetry in your application.
```

More information about Prometheus and how to configure can be found at:
[https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#scrape_config](Prometheus Scraping Config)

For a fully functioning code example for using this exporter, please have a look
at: <https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/tree/main/experimental/examples/prometheus>

## Exporting measurements to Opentelemetry Protocol

> Opentelemetry Javascript comes with three different kind of exporters that export

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry JavaScript comes with three different kinds of exporters that export
```

> the collected metrics in the Opentelemetry Protocol (OTLP). The three exports

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the collected metrics in the OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP). The three exports
```

> the collected metrics in the Opentelemetry Protocol (OTLP). The three exports
> different in the transport method to send the metrics to a backend that supports
> the OTLP protocol, (a) [https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/tree/main/experimental/packages/opentelemetry-exporter-metrics-otlp-http](over HTTP) (b) [https://www.npmjs.com/package/@opentelemetry/exporter-metrics-otlp-grpc](over GRPC) (c) [https://www.npmjs.com/package/@opentelemetry/exporter-metrics-otlp-proto](over Protofbuf).

Reviewer 3: Switched up the order of recommendation a bit. :slightly_smiling_face:
I think http/proto should be the most supported by backends as recommended by the spec :slightly_smiling_face:  

```suggestion
the collected metrics in the OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP). Each exporter uses
a different transport method to send the metrics to a backend that supports
the OTLP protocol, (a) [https://www.npmjs.com/package/@opentelemetry/exporter-metrics-otlp-proto](over HTTP using Protofbuf) (b) [https://www.npmjs.com/package/@opentelemetry/exporter-metrics-otlp-grpc](over gRPC) (c) [https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/tree/main/experimental/packages/opentelemetry-exporter-metrics-otlp-http](over HTTP using JSON).
```

> In the example below shows how you can configure Opentelemetry Javascript to use

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The example below shows how you can configure OpenTelemetry JavaScript to use
```

> the OTLP exporter over HTTP.

Reviewer 3: Here we could also recommend protobuf instead :slightly_smiling_face: 
```suggestion
the OTLP exporter using http/protobuf.
```

```typescript
const { MeterProvider, PeriodicExportingMetricReader } = require('@opentelemetry/sdk-metrics');

> const { OTLPMetricExporter } =  require('@opentelemetry/exporter-metrics-otlp-http');

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const { OTLPMetricExporter } =  require('@opentelemetry/exporter-metrics-otlp-proto');
```

  - [Exporting measurements to Prometheus](#exporting-measurements-to-prometheus)
  - [Exporting measurements to Opentelemetry Protocol](#exporting-measurements-to-opentelemetry-protocol)

## Getting Started

> In thie page, you'll leaarn how to setup and metrics from an HTTP server with Fastify. If you're not using Fastify, that's fine -- this guide will also work with Express, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this page, you'll learn how to setup OpenTelemetry JS to export metrics from an HTTP server with Fastify. If you're not using Fastify, that's fine -- this guide will also work with Express, etc.
```

Author: Thank you @dyladan . I have applied your suggestions and made sure some words are spelled in American English form
